---
layout: post
title:  "Sh-Zsh-Bash Chart Refactor"
date:   2018-01-05 21:32:00 -0500
categories: graphviz refactor sh zsh bash
---

So, on the Grand Rapids Slack team, T.J. Zimmerman shared an interesting chart (originally by [Peter Ward](https://github.com/flowblok), from his blog post [here](https://blog.flowblok.id.au/2013-02/shell-startup-scripts.html)) which showed the behaviors of `sh`, `zsh` and `bash` as they built (and tore down) their environments in each of (non-)remote, (non-)login and (non-)interactice sessions. It was interesting in that it conveyed a huge amount of very useful information, but I was, well, offended that it didn't seem to do so well.

I haven't (yet) secured Peter's permission to embed his image here, so you'll have to go look at it in his blog post listed above. But I'll describe my issues with it here.

Before I continue, let be clear that he clearly did a huge amount of research building his post (and his charts), and the information he assembled visually is quite valuable. He gets the credit for the research.

That said...

## Concerns

1. I found the chart to be difficult to process, visually; I'm not in any degree color-blind, but the closely-spaced lines were difficult to follow, and more than once while rebuilding the chart, I followed the wrong branch at one point or another because of the color-coded switchback approach.
1. If you don't read the supporting text around the chart, it's not clear what the `/etc/bash.bashrc -> {~/.profile, ~/.bash_profile, ~/.bash_login} -> running` construct means; I initially thought it implied each of `{~/.profile, ~/.bash_profile, ~/.bash_login}` would be consumed in some unclear order, but it turns out that subsequent entries in the list are only consumed if earlier entries aren't found.
1. It's very difficult to follow the flow in reverse; choose a node further down in the chart, and try to walk the chart backwards. Perhaps you'll have an easier time than I did, but I found the edges crowded and the paths complex, espcially around the `bash`-specific paths.

I thought, "I can do better than this. It won't even take that long." Well, it took me over a week of spare cycles at home to get Graphviz to produce something I was satisfied with. I was at least half-wrong, but I certainly learned a lot along the way! And, boy, did it produce a lot of blog fodder.

## Results

Here's (mostly; I found and fixed a bug or two) the same data as in the original chart, but cleaned up:

![A chart showing each of Sh, Zsh and Bash session setup and teardown workflows. Each shell variant covered includes each combination of non-login and login, non-interactive and interactive sessions. Bash further includes non-remote vs remote workflows. Non-login, non-interactive workflows are drawn in black. Non-login, interactive workflows are drawn in orange. Login, non-interactive workflows are drawn in sky blue. Login, interactive workflows are drawn in sea green. On the left is a column labeling the workflow by shell type and session type. On the right is a column containing the label 'Running...'. In between are columns with the occasional label identifying other files that may be consumed. The Sh non-login, non-interactive workflow proceeds directly to the Running state. The Sh non-login, interactive workflow evaluates $ENV, and then proceeds to the Running state. The Sh login, non-interactive state evaluates ~/.profile, then proceeds to the Running state. The Sh login, interactive state evaluates ~/.profile, then $ENV, and finally proceeds to the Running state. The Zsh non-login, non-interactive workflow evaluates /etc/zshenv, then ~/.zshenv, and then proceeds to the Running state. The Zsh non-login, interactive workflow evaluates ~/etc/zshenv, then ~/.zshenv, and finally ~/.zshrc before proceeding to the Running state. The Zsh login, non-interactive state evaluates ~/etc/zshenv, then ~/.zshenv, then ~/.zprofile, ~/.zlogin, then enters the Running state, and finally evaluates ~/.zlogout. The Zsh login, interactive workflow evaluates ~/.etc/zshenv, ~/.zshenv, ~/.zprofile, ~/.zshrc, ~/.zlogin, and then the Running state before proceeding to evaluate ~/.zlogout. The Bash Non-remote, Non-login, non-interactive workflow evaluates $BASH_ENV before proceeding to the Running state. The Bash non-remote, non-login, non-interactive state evaluates /etc/bash.bashrc, then ~/.bashrc, and finally proceeds to the Running state. The Bash non-remote, login, non-interactive workflow evaluates /etc/profile. It then attempts to evaluate each of ~/.profile, ~/.bash_login and ~/.bash_profile. If it finds one, it skips the rest and evaluates $BASH_ENV before proceeding to the Running state and finally evaluating ~/.bash_logout. The Bash non-remote, login, interactive workflow evaluates /etc/profile. It then attempts to evaluate each of ~/.profile, ~/.bash_login and ~/.bash_profile. If it finds one, it skips the rest and proceeds to the Running state before evaluating ~/.bash_logout. The Bash remote, non-login, non-interactive workflow evaluates /etc/bash.bashrc, then ~/.bashrc before proceeding to the Running state. The Bash remote, non-login, interactive workflow proceeds immediately to a label reading 'No path', and does not proceed further. The Bash Remote Login Non-Interactive workflow evaluates /etc/profile. It then attempts to evaluate each of ~/.profile, ~/.bash_login and ~/.bash_profile. If it finds one, it skips the rest and evaluates $BASH_ENV before proceeding to the Running state and finally evaluating ~/.bash_logout. Where ~/.profile, ~/.bash_login and ~/.bash_profile are considered, the first two are represented by a trio of boxes arranged with the name of the file in one box, 'Found' and 'Not found' in the other box. Lines lead into the box naming the file, while lines lead out from the 'Found' or 'Not found' boxes to signify whether th file in question was found or not. The trio of boxes are bound tightly to each other, and both trios of boxes and the ~/.bash_profile are arranged in a common column, top to bottom, in the order they're considered. The same column is shared by the box trios found for similar logic sequences in each other workflow that needs to consider ~/.profile, ~/.bash_login and ~/.bash_profile. Files of the same (or sufficiently similar) name are placed in the same columns, with dotted lines connecting them. Every instance of /etc/zshenv is connected with a dotted line, as is every instance of ~/.zshenv, every instance of /etc/profile, ~/.bashrc, and so on.]({{ site.url }}/assets/sh-zsh-bash-refactor/refactor-output/refactor-output.svg)

So, again, we're covering each of `sh`, `zsh` and `bash`, with every combination of shell, (non)remote, (non)login and (non)interactive, where the shell supports the distinction. (Only `bash` recognizes remote shells.)

### Swimlanes

The first thing to notice is the use of swimlanes. Instead of using a common node to identify a file, we use a swimlane to identify a combination of session parameters. While this makes the chart decidedly less compact, reduces a lot of pressure on the layout engine, letting us do a lot more tweaking, and giving us the option of packing in more information without the output looking like a tangled mess of spaghetti flow.

#### Origins / Rationale
The use of swimlanes came out of my earlier attempt to reformulate the chart as a truth table (before I discovered that the special conditional relationships between ~/.profile, ~/.bash_login and ~/.bash_profile), which followed my attempt to replace the nodes in the original chart with clusters where each workflow would stop off at a workflow-dedicated node in a cluster corresponding to the file being evaluated. If that sounds confusing, that might be related to why graphviz gave me a bunch of spaghetti for my efforts.
